i want you to hit me
as hard as you can
[Music]
hi i'm luke ryan for joeblow.com and
welcome to movie endings explained
this time we're going to be looking at
the 90s classic the usual suspects
directed by brian singer and written by
christopher macquarie this 1995 mystery
crime piece
arrived to great acclaim and won many
awards
telling the story of a heist gone wrong
the film plays out largely in flashback
with kevin spacey's character verbal
kint relaying the story to us
customs agent dave kuyan verbal was part
of a five-man
group the usual suspects who were pulled
as suspects in a truck hijacking only to
be released
they then decided to pull off a jewelry
heist together and through a series of
unfortunate occurrences
end up at the mercy of the mysterious
kaiser soze
a turkish crime lord shrouded in secrecy
on his orders the crew were sent to
destroy millions of dollars worth of
cocaine on a drug smuggling ship
which is where the film begins we see
gabriel burns's character
keaton who is badly wounded and dying on
the ship
he's confronted by kaiser and then shot
the boat goes up in flames the only
survivors were verbal who is a [ __ ]
with cerebral palsy
and a hungarian mobster who escaped with
severe burns
so this is a film in which four-fifths
of our core main characters are locked
into a mortal fate
the only one who is going to survive as
we now know it
is verbal who tells the whole story from
the formation of the crew
to their meeting with a lawyer named
kobayashi an
employee and associate of kaiser soze
in the opening scene as the boat goes up
in flames we see a close-up of ropes
wood and steel the push-in from the
camera suggests something we need to
focus on
something we're not quite seeing for
ourselves later on
verbal recounts the night of the attack
on the boat and we see that he was
hiding behind the ropes
and saw kaiser kill keaton or so he
thinks
kuyan however believes from everything
verbal has told him that keaton
is kaiser soze in the commentary track
for the usual suspects brian singer and
christopher macquarie say that they show
you the truth in the first five minutes
of the film
then spend the rest trying to convince
you that you saw
something else as verbal leaves kuyan's
office
distraught at the idea that keaton had
betrayed him and with kaiser soze all
along
the pieces suddenly begin to fall into
place
[Music]
in a brilliant use of sound design or
lack thereof
kuyan's mug hits the floor as the
mystery starts to unwrap
he realizes that many of the details in
the story that verbal has just told him
the story that we as an audience have
just spent an hour and a half watching
have been lifted from notes and details
that litter his own office
even down to the brand name of the mug
kobayashi
kuyan scrambles to catch up with verbal
fearing the worst and we see him
outside limping the layering of audio
becomes
overwhelming as the fragments are all
blended together the scene building to a
crescendo
and we simply see verbal's feet
limping at first as we saw him before
before smoothly transitioning into a
normal
and purposeful stride the implication
and a fairly heavy one at that is that
verbal
is kaiser soze and he just walked away
scot-free it's a hell of a twist ending
and one that's been parodied and
discussed for decades now
the kind of ending that just permeates
the pop culture landscape even if you've
never seen the usual suspects
you probably have a base awareness of
its final twist via osmosis
on the surface it's fairly clear-cut
once the film shows you verbal's obvious
deception
can the entire film and story that he
spun to kuyan
be viewed as a complete fabrication
clearly
not as we have the hungarian who
survived the burns and who was able to
give a description of kaiser one that
matches verbal's face pretty damn
closely
yet a lot of the elements of the story
can easily be called into question
based on how freely and loosely verbal
was cherry-picking details from kuyan's
office
that in and of itself however could be
yet another deception tactic
there are a number of things throughout
the film that link between these two
realities
kobayashi for one appears at the end
when verbal gets into the car
now it's highly likely that kobayashi is
an employee of kaiser
but the verbal merely gave him an alias
when telling kuyan the story
but then there's the scene in which
kobayashi supposedly
is in the same room as verbal supposedly
there's a lot of different things that
come into play once you know what
happens at the end
because it reframes the entire story but
does the ending
really clarified the verbal is
definitively
kaiser soze is everything wrapped up in
a neat little package the moment he
lights his cigarette and gets into the
car
maybe not there's always the possibility
that kobayashi
as we came to know him is actually
kaiser soze
verbal doesn't quite seem as old or as
experienced as an almost mythical figure
that kaiser has built up to be
might look like at one point verbal
tells kuyanov a rumor that soze murdered
his entire
family when they were held hostage by
hungarian mobsters
but again this is a story coming
directly from verbal so many pinches of
salt need to be taken
then there's keaton he could still very
possibly be soze too
he was the one who planned everything
and was a former cop he would know what
it would take
to evade the law and to get away with
this grand master plan
when it comes down to it almost anyone
could be sose
in the opening scene when keaton is
faced with kaiser brian singer had
gabriel byrne play the figure of kaiser
even though you don't see his face the
film is intentionally trying to play
tricks with you
and keeps you guessing at the time that
it came out kevin spacey wasn't the big
name he eventually became towards the
back half of the 90s
and the usual suspects bagged him an
academy award leading to a slew of
success
he didn't immediately stand out as
someone you should be looking at more
closely in the film
and in the 25 years since it was
released kevin spacey arguably became
the most decorated actor of the entire
cast
his recent allegations aside of course
but that wasn't the case in 1995
gabriel byrne has said that his job was
to take the attention off
spacey in the opening scene we see
kaiser using a gold lighter
and then also wearing a gold watch in
the final scene
verbal is seen with both
incontrovertible evidence that verbal is
kaiser maybe they're certainly placed
there for a reason but wants to say he
isn't holding on to them
for the real kaiser the film is
primarily designed however to buy you
into the idea that the twist is that
keaton is kaiser soze
verbal is framed as the eccentric
intelligent but nevertheless sympathetic
party
with a weakness inherent in the way that
he holds himself
some may look on it now as too obvious
and especially with spacey's more
well-known status since the film's
release
it still holds up as a genuinely well
executed twist either way though in my
opinion
and when watching the film again the
scenes with verbal telling the story
are played very fair and they come fresh
with a newly subtle layer of context
for example if you go back to that
opening scene pay close attention to the
way that
keaton looks up at kaiser when he
registers his face and
realizes it's verbal it's written
all over his face it's the surprise
it's the i should have known it's all
there in the facial expressions and it
pays off again
when you re-watch the film i can't feel
my legs
verbal shows the true power that can lie
in the unreliable narrator
a method used countless times in the
genre of film noir
a genre that the usual suspect certainly
owes a great debt to
just because you're being shown
something as an audience much like kuyan
is being painted a mental image as an
audience to verbal's potentially tall
tale
doesn't mean that it's true but it
doesn't mean that it's false
either and finding the exact truth in
the story like the usual suspect would
be impossible
ultimately though the real through line
of the film is
that verbal is kaiser souza it's fun to
speculate but that's the carpet pull
they're going for when verbal tells
kuyan that keaton can convince anyone
he's someone else but never himself
it's a sly wink to the truth in the
famous lineup scene
and throughout that early section of the
backstory in fact
verbal doesn't really have much of a
presence he's more in the background
he isn't shown being arrested he isn't
shown being interrogated and unlike the
other four men who read out the same
line
when verbal delivers his version he's
shown in close-up the rest of the group
out of focus it's likely that he was
never actually in this lineup that he
was
never arrested or interrogated for the
truck hijacking
he's inserting himself into the
narrative but he's being subtle
not showing his hand too obviously in
the story he's telling kuyon
another clue is that many times in the
film when kaiser soze is mentioned the
next cut
will be directly to verbal mr jose's
primary interest is narcotics then
there's the name
verbal kent which sneakily alludes to
kaiser soze
in turkish which is meant to be the
nationality of kaiser
the word sozo translates to verbal and
in german
some say his father was german the word
kaiser translates to emperor or king
king kent the ropes at the beginning of
the film the verbal was supposedly
hiding behind
you can't see him in those shots because
he was never
there and while gabriel byrne apparently
thought up until the premiere of the
film that he was in fact kaiser soze
there's really only one answer to that
question the question that forms the
central mystery of the film
who is kaiser soze the answer
is that it doesn't matter because he's
already gone
you